Skip to main content
Code Institute Home PageCodeInstitute: CPJS_06_20
JavaScript Essentials
 Dashboard for:kellyjona@gmail.com 
Code Institute Logo
PROGRAMME OVERVIEW
STUDENT SUPPORT
 GITPOD
 SLACK
JavaScript & the DOM  Handling DOM Events  Mouse Movements & Scrolling
Search in Module
 Previous
Next 
other Click Events 
problem Click Events Challenge 
other Mouse Movements & Scrolling 
problem Mouse Movements & Scrolling Challenge 
other Loading Events 
problem Loading Events Challenge 
other Change Events 
problem Change Events Challenge 
other Keyboard Events 
problem Keyboard Events Challenge 
other Adding Event Listeners 
problem Adding Event Listeners Challenge 
other Working With JavaScript Functions 
problem Working With JavaScript Functions Challenge 
Mouse Movements & Scrolling
 Bookmark this page
WHAT ARE THEY?

JavaScript mouse movement and scrolling events.

 
WHAT DO THEY DO?

Represent mouse movements and scrolling in a programmatic way.

 
HOW DO YOU USE THEM?

By capturing the event and executing some code in response.



Mouse Movements and Scrolling

headings graphics
Another common requirement when manipulating the DOM and responding to user actions is capturing mouse movements. These movements include the mouse moving over an element (onmouseover/onmouseenter), off of an element (onmouseout/onmouseleave), scrolling (onscroll) and moving around while over an element (onmousemove). The MouseEvent object which provides this functionality has several properties which are useful when tracking the mouse, such as clientX and clientY, which return the X and Y coordinates of the mouse respectively (relative to the window).

To summarize, here is a table containing the most common mouse events used when tracking mouse movements:

Event/Property	Description
EVENTS
onmouseenter	The event occurs when the pointer is moved onto an element
onmouseleave	The event occurs when the pointer is moved out of an element
onmousemove	The event occurs when the pointer is moving while it is over an element
onmouseout	The event occurs when a user moves the mouse pointer out of an element, or out of one of its children
onmouseover	The event occurs when the pointer is moved onto an element, or onto one of its children
onscroll	The event occurs when an element's scrollbar is being scrolled, or when scrolling with the mouse/trackpad.
PROPERTIES
clientX	Returns the horizontal coordinate of the mouse pointer, relative to the current window, when the mouse event was triggered
clientY	Returns the vertical coordinate of the mouse pointer, relative to the current window, when the mouse event was triggered
For examples of these events, see the runnable example below. Pay attention to these points as you go through this example:

All the events that are used in the HTML file (onmouseenter, onmouseleave, etc) utilize the same function to handle the event: handleEvent()
Each time that function is called in the HTML to handle one of these events, we pass it a parameter called event
The event parameter is implicitly defined for all events, so if you're wondering where it came from or what it represents, it's built in and it represents the actual event that occurred (like a click, the mouse moving, or scrolling)
In script.js, this event parameter is used inside handleEvent() to reference the event that triggered the function. That's how we can get the type of event that triggered it and handle all those different events with a single function!

Runnable Example



Expand

 Previous
Next 
AboutTerms and ConditionsPrivacy PolicyPlagiarism PolicyFAQ© 2021 Code Institute.