The Box Model - Border

When creating a border with CSS, there are three values that you need to set: border-width, border-style and border-color. You can set these values individually, or you can use the shorthand border property.

border-width
We can define the border-width property as a numeric px, em, rem, vh or vw value. But it can also take a keyword thin, medium or thick.


border-style
The border-style property keywords available are as follows:

Value	Description
solid	
A solid, continuous line.
none	
No line is drawn (default)
dashed	
A line that consists of dashes
dotted	
A line that consists of dots
double	
Two lines are drawn around the element
groove	
Adds a bevel based on the color value in a way that makes the element appear embossed into the document.
ridge	
Similar to groove, but reverses the color values in a way that makes the element appear proud of the page.
inset	
Adds a 3d look to the line that makes the element appear slightly inset to the page
outset	
Similar to inset, but this time slightly raised.

border-color
Like setting font colour, we can define the border-color property as rgb, rgba, hex, hsl, hsla or a colour keyword.

border
The border shorthand property
The border property is a shorthand which can take multiple values for a line drawn around the targetted element. It takes the longhand properties border-width, border-style and border-color one at a time on the same line.

/* Longhand properties for border */
border-width: 2px;
border-style: dashed;
border-color: blue;

/* Shorthand for the same code as above */
border: 2px dashed blue;
        

border-radius
If you have added a coloured border, you can give it rounded corners using the border-radius property. It too takes four values with pixel units. Like with padding, if you give border-radius one to four values

Value	Description
border-radius: 20px;	
This text is wrapped in a div with one border radius value, so the same curve is applied to all its corners.
border-radius: 20px 40px;	
This text is wrapped in a div with two border radius values, so the top-left and bottom right corners have a radius of 20px, and the other two corners have a radius of 40px.
border-radius: 20px 40px 5px;	
This text is wrapped in a div with three border radius values, so the top-left corner has a radius of 20px, the top right and bottom left have 40px and the bottom right has 2px.
border-radius: 20px 40px 5px 50px;	
This text is wrapped in a div with four border radius values, so they are applied clockwise one at a time starting at the top left corner.

A fun trick to know is that can make a div into a circle using the border-radius property:

This is done with the following code:

width: 50px;
height: 50px;
border: 1px solid black;
border-radius: 50%;
As the 50% is a relative measurement, to make the circle, your element must start as a square, with its length and width being equal. Then the order-radius curves the corners perfectly to make the circle.